anyway it is chapter 17 unsustainable
part
two of that chapter and in this chapter
what we've been learning about is the
ambiguity almost the studied ambiguity
of the word sustainable and david has
previously mentioned
in this chapter how sustain can mean
something along the lines of provide you
with what you need
but also sustain can mean keep things
the same way to sustain a particular way
of life
way of doing things and with human
beings with people
these two senses of the word sustain can
be at utter odds with one another
because we need change we need progress
in order for us to provide ourselves
with what we need
we're going to have to have new
resources come into being create new
knowledge
enable us to weather the problems that
the cosmos throws against us
so we are only sustained by
constant and rapid progress constant and
rapid
problem solving so without further ado
for this episode let's get straight into
the reading
and david writes the easter islanders
culture sustained them
in both senses this is the hallmark of a
functioning
static society it provided them with a
way of life but it also inhibited
change it sustained their determination
to enact
and re-enact the same behaviors for
generations it sustained the values that
placed forests
literally beneath statues and it
sustained the shapes of those statues
and the pointless project of building
ever more of them
moreover the portion of the culture that
sustained them in the sense of providing
for their needs
was not especially impressive other
stone age societies
have managed to take fish from the sea
and sow crops without wasting their
efforts in
endless monument building and if the
prevailing theory is true the easter
islanders started to starve before
the fall of their civilization in other
words even after it had stopped
providing for them
it retained its fatal proficiency at
sustaining a fixed pattern of behaviour
and so it remained effective at
preventing them from addressing the
problem
by the only means that could possibly
have been effective
creative thought and innovation
attenborough regards the culture as
having been very valuable
and its fall as a tragedy bronowski's
view was closer to mine
which is that since the culture never
improved its survival for many centuries
was a tragedy
like that of all static societies just
pausing there
um this is reminiscent of some other
things that david has said
over the years that i've heard it it
conjures in the mind
what david says about how species
don't care that they're going extinct
there's nothing about the
species of panda bears that causes the
species to be worried about its own
extinction
there's nothing in the genes that causes
worry
in the pandas the pandas don't know
they're going extinct okay pandas may
suffer they may experience pain who
don't who knows i don't have
a particularly strong view on that i
happen to think that
it's possibly the case that animals
because of the different kind of
software
running on their brains they aren't
capable of certain kinds of qualia
all that aside a species as it gradually
goes extinct
doesn't have a way in with the sp the
species isn't intelligent
the species itself isn't intelligent now
this is similar to this idea
here about how some people misdirect
their concern about the fall of a
civilization
because i think that psychologically
they're worried about the individual
people and certainly we should worry
about
individual people but not cultures
cultures don't care cultures don't have
minds cultures simply
are a certain group of memes a mean plex
that is going on and sometimes those
cultures are terribly damaging
it's much like languages people who are
interested in linguistics you often hear
that they
bemoan and regret the fact that certain
languages are going extinct
now aside from it being of academic
interest
there's no need to worry about a
language going extinct it's not
causing particular suffering for those
people who once spoke that language
because
they're no longer with us we should of
course be
primarily concerned about the suffering
of other
people but this is very different to
being concerned about
the suffering of a language or the
suffering of
a culture cultures don't suffer
languages don't suffer in the same way
that species don't suffer
so if you misdirect your
focus of concern then what you're apt to
do
is to be worried less about individual
people and their suffering and more
worried about the abstract
of something like a civilization that is
actually
the cause of the suffering of individual
people and by the way
it seems to be the case if you look into
certain languages certain dead languages
or certain languages that
that aren't very popular anymore or that
are going extinct
some of these languages seem incapable
of being able to represent things like
complex numbers they have more
difficulty with
abstract concepts than certain other
modern languages
like english or like french or like
cantonese and so on and so forth
that if you have an ancient type
language that has
somehow remained extant in an amazon
rainforest or a
some other south american place and
people still speak these languages
they're incapable not because their
minds are incapable but they're
incapable at times of being able to
represent number
in that language so i've read i could be
wrong about this but this is what i've
read
that in certain languages for example
you can't count beyond
a certain highest number because what
happens then
is that you just say and more and more
rather than having
specific words for certain numbers and
for similar reasons there's difficulty
with logic in other languages as well
and that might be a reason why
certain cultures don't make the advances
that have been made in certain other
cultures because their language is
less able to adapt itself in order to
conjure good explanations
that could be the case that's just a
conjecture i could be wrong about that
but for here as david says there
we should not be concerned about certain
cultures
certain societies which actually
actively
cause not only the
society to become static but like all
static societies
exacerbate the suffering that's going on
with individuals in those societies
because the individuals are capable of
suffering
and if they weren't in that static
society which is putting ever more
effort into building ridiculous
monuments
then they might be able to make progress
an endless stream of knowledge creation
in order to lift themselves out of the
terrible dire straits in which they find
themselves
on some hapless island
losing its finite resources because they
do not have
the capacity the time energy and effort
required
in order to create more knowledge which
allows them to find
new resources let's continue david
writes
attenborough is not alone in drawing
frightening lessons from the history of
easter island
it has become a widely adduced version
of the spaceship earth metaphor
but what exactly is the analogy behind
the lesson the idea that civilization
depends on good
forest management has little reach but
the broader interpretation
that survival depends on good resource
management has almost no content
any physical object can be deemed a
resource and
since problems are soluble all disasters
are caused by poor resource management
the ancient roman ruler julius caesar
was stabbed to death
so one could summarize his mistake as
imprudent iron management resulting in
an excessive buildup of iron in his body
it is true that if he had succeeded in
keeping iron away from his body he would
not have died in the
exact way he did yet as an explanation
of how
and why he died that ludicrously misses
the point
the interesting question is not what he
was stabbed with but how it came about
that other politicians plotted to remove
him violently from office
and they succeeded a papillion analysis
would focus on the fact that caesar had
taken vigorous steps
to ensure that he could not be removed
without
violence and then on the fact that his
removal did not rectify but actually
entrenched this progress suppressing
innovation
to understand such events and their
wider significance one has to understand
the politics of the situation
the psychology the philosophy sometimes
the theology not the cutlery
the easter islanders may or may not have
suffered a forest management fiasco
but if they did the explanation would
not be about why they made mistakes
problems are inevitable but why they
failed to
correct them pausing there just my
reflection on that summary i suppose
summary
so any particular problem
does not necessarily have to be the end
of society because
as we hear throughout the book problems
are inevitable what the real problem is
is the persistent failure to even
attempt
to correct certain problems so in the
case of
tyrannical regimes if people are getting
removed
violently one emperor after another
the problem there is the inability
to find a mechanism which we call
democracy in the papillion sense
of removing rulers without violence and
if you're a ruler
and the previous 10 rulers have all been
stabbed to death or otherwise
removed via a mob of some sort then you
better be thinking to yourself that
there's something wrong with the system
and you need to correct this system in
some way
and so too with so-called resource
management
any pr prior civilization ancient
civilization
that has gone extinct due to a problem
of
resource management it isn't because
they run out
of wood it's because that as they run
out of
wood they couldn't conjure an idea about
how to stop
depleting the wood let's say or doing
what they were doing
rather than trying to figure out
solutions trying to create new knowledge
trying to make
progress and of course we can judge
these ancient civilizations these
civilizations that have gone extinct
because we are in the lofty position of
being
the sole remaining civilization that
is dynamic if there have been dynamic
societies before
they've gone extinct things have gone
wrong probably they've turned to stasis
or static societies around them have
attacked them and so this is why we if
we want to survive if we want to be
the sole exception to the rule that
every single society that has ever
existed
has gone extinct if we want to be the
exception to that and not ever go
extinct we
have to use this creative capacity to
continue to solve problems and when we
encounter them
to really turn our critical faculties
towards solving that problem
including criticizing the society itself
that's very important
being able to criticize mechanisms
within society processes in society
not in the thoughtless manner not
criticism just for the sake of criticism
targeted criticism when there's a
problem people today of course
politically and this has always been the
case
can become critical of the western
tradition and the enlightenment
traditions
without first understanding what it's
all about
in other words they criticize criticism
itself
they criticize let's say democracy or
they criticize let's say capitalism
these are means of correcting errors in
rulers and policies and the market
respectively
and if you have a misunderstanding of
what these systems are
if you think that capitalism which is
actually freedom
is oppressive and if you think that
democracy which is actually a way of
changing rulers without violence is in
fact a form of tyranny keeping down the
small person or something like that
then what you're apt to do is to focus
your criticism
in the wrong place namely against means
of correcting errors and if there's one
thing
as the beginning of affinity says and if
there's one moral maxim that david in
some moods says that he should regard as
the
solid foundation if you like of course
he wouldn't like that
as being a starting point for all uh
morality or at least of being a a moral
maxim that we shouldn't
be able to correct change alter that one
being
do not destroy the means of error
correction
that being the one moral maxim that we
have to protect
at all costs if you are the kind of
person that thinks
that democracy has to be cast aside
because it's not working for certain
people or that capitalism needs to be
cast aside because it's not working for
people
what you're doing is misunderstanding
what those systems are about those
systems are about
correcting errors and if you were to
destroy those systems
you're destroying means of correcting
errors
it's the same reason by the way that the
death penalty is
is morally abhorrent to many of us
because a
person no matter how evil they are
can in theory in principle
correct their errors and so even the
worst
most awful person because a person is
really a software program they're a mind
a mind can be changed and if their mind
is changed of course they might end up
feeling guilty about all the terrible
things they've done
but if you kill them there's no means of
correcting that error so you've
destroyed
a means of correcting their error in
other words their
very poor mental state their very poor
ideas so
that is that is way off topic here let's
go back to the book
and david says quote i have argued that
the laws of nature cannot possibly
impose any bound on progress
by the arguments of chapter one and
three denying this is tantamount to
invoking the supernatural
in other words progress is sustainable
indefinitely
but only by people who engage in a
particular kind of thinking and behavior
the problem solving and the problem
creating kind characteristic of the
enlightenment
and that requires the optimism of a
dynamic society
one of the consequences of optimism is
that one expects to learn from failure
one's own and others but the idea that
our civilization has something to learn
from the easter islanders
alleged forestry failure is not derived
from any structural resemblance between
our situation and theirs
because they failed to make progress in
practically every area no one expects
the easter islanders failures in same
medicine
to explain our difficulties in curing
cancer or their failure to understand
the night sky to explain why our quantum
theory of gravity
is elusive to us the easter island is
errors both methodological and
substantive
were simply too elementary to be
relevant to us and their imprudent
forestry
if that really is what destroyed their
civilization would be typical
of their lack of problem solving across
the board we should do much better to
study their many small successes than
their entirely commonplace failures
if we could discover their rules of
thumb such as stone mulching
to help grow crops on poor soil we might
find valuable fragments of historical
and ethnological knowledge or perhaps
even something of practical use
but one cannot draw general conclusions
from rules of thumb
it would be astonishing if the details
of a primitive static society's collapse
had any relevance to hidden dangers that
may be facing our open
dynamic and scientific society let alone
what we should do about them
pause there just my reflection on this
one of the more powerful points
that sam harris the podcaster and author
has made neuroscientists
has made over the years with respect to
morality
is in his strident and quite accurate
arguments against moral relativism and
this is the idea that for example
the fundamentalist islamic
cult the taliban should
be respected in moral terms that if they
have certain
abhorrent moral practices we
in the west shouldn't judge them nor
anyone else for that matter
so the taliban might be an extreme
example
of as sam would say that using the
example the the terrible example of
the honour killing let's say or throwing
acid in the face of young girls for the
crime of being seen with a man outside
of the house
so on and so forth as sam
says being a moral relativist on this
point
thinking that the taliban has some
reasonable stance something to teach us
about morality
is rather like saying well maybe they
have something to teach us about
chemistry
or physics of course they don't that
would be ridiculous
there's nothing in their holy books that
can inform us about the standard model
it's laughable to think that anything
scientific
could be learned by an ancient culture
that
actively seeks not knowledge but stasis
and so too in morality and very much
echoes the point here
we should pity people that today
still live in cultures like that but
because of cultural relativism
very much because of cultural relativism
there is a
lack of will of trying to save
people from these terrible cultures now
it's not the case that we should go in
there
into these cultures necessarily and use
violence or use
force unless people want us to
unless there are people within that
culture who are crying out for help and
they possibly are i don't know enough
about geopolitics in order to
comment upon this uh with any reasonable
accuracy
but what i would say is that anyone who
wants to escape that
kind of culture should be welcomed with
open arms
just as recently both the united kingdom
and australia have said that anyone from
hong kong who wants to come to our
countries
is very welcome because the tyrannical
backward political ideology that drives
communist china
is causing great suffering and we can
see that and is morally right
for us to allow anyone from those
countries who wants to come here
with enlightenment values with the ideas
of democracy freedom capitalism and so
on
should be allowed to in fact not
to allow that is morally reprehensible
we should be standing up for those
values which means
we need to spread those values far and
wide
okay back to the book and david writes
the knowledge that would have saved the
easter islanders civilization has
already been in our possession for
centuries
a sextant would have allowed them to
explore their ocean and bring back the
seeds of new forests
and of new ideas greater wealth and a
written culture would have enabled them
to recover after a devastating plague
but most of all they would have been
better at solving problems of all kinds
if they had known some of our ideas
about how to do that
such as the rudiments of a scientific
outlook such knowledge would not have
guaranteed their welfare
any more that it guarantees ours
nevertheless the fact that their
civilization
failed for lack of what ours discovered
long ago
cannot be an ominous warning of what the
future could hold
for us pause there just reflecting on
that
so attenborough's mistake and the
mistake of a certain
kind of environmentalist thinker when
looking at
failed civilizations like this is to
misunderstand the qualitative difference
between
that kind of civilization and ours that
kind of civilization
is not attempting to make progress
they're trying to maintain
sustain a particular way of life which
is not making progress
which is probably enacting certain
religious rituals
and for that reason is going to devote
ever more resources
to doing the thing which is causing
extinction
of their culture and of their society
ours is different
ours is trying to exploit everything we
can
in the physical environment using our
creative knowledge
in order to sustain us to sustain our
continually
rapid progress and change so the sustain
there
is similar in the first sense namely we
both want to sustain our societies we
both want to sustain
things as they are but for the easter
islanders
things as they are are the same from day
to day to year to year
but for us things are different from day
to day and from year to year
we are deliberately trying to change
things namely
in the direction of improvement of
progress of the objective better
and so our computers get faster our cars
become more efficient
our power generation is better and so on
and so forth things get better our
medicine gets better our science gets
better we learn more
that's what we want to sustain we want
to continue to do that and the only way
for us to continue to sustain rapid
progress and rapid change is by
continually creating more knowledge
about how to exploit the things around
us maybe people don't like to hear the
word exploit it sounds pejorative
but to me this is really what we want to
do because we want to
take the raw materials that are around
us this boring
matter that most of the universe
consists of just
otherwise useless hydrogen and helium
gas
and rocks and dust and the stuff that is
out there in the cosmos we want to
exploit that we want to take that
and transform it into something truly
astonishing
a civilization an open-ended stream of
knowledge creation that's what we want
to do
we want to create a new spaceship
universe where it's the universe that is
really sustaining us
not because the universe is
some godlike figure that's going to look
after us but rather
that the universe will be under our
control
under our control just like my house is
under my control to some extent
that i've got air conditioning and
flowing water and electricity and so on
and so forth
eventually in the distant future larger
regions of space will be able to sustain
us
sustain us in the same way that people's
homes
sustain them now because the people are
able to control
the material out of which their home is
made and so too we'll be able to do that
with
ever larger regions of space and ever
greater quantities of matter and raw
materials
back to the book david says
this knowledge-based approach to
explaining human events
follows from the general arguments of
this book we know that by achieving
arbitrary physical transformations that
are not forbidden by the laws of physics
such as replanting a forest can only be
a matter of knowing how
we know that finding out how is a matter
of seeking good explanations
we also know that whether a particular
attempt to make progress will succeed or
not
is profoundly unpredictable it can be
understood in retrospect
but not in terms of factors that could
have been known in advance
thus we now understand why alchemists
never succeeded at transmutation
because they would have had to have
understood
some nuclear physics first but this
could not have been known at the time
and the progress they did make which led
to the science of chemistry
depended strongly on how individual
alchemists thought
and only peripherally on factors like
which chemicals could be found nearby
the conditions for a beginning of
infinity exist in almost every
human habitation on earth in his book
guns germs and steel the biogeographer
jared diamond takes the opposite view
he proposes what he calls an ultimate
explanation of why human history was so
different on different continents
in particular he seeks to explain why it
was europeans who sailed out to conquer
the americas
australasia and africa and not vice
versa in diamond's view
the psychology and philosophy and
politics of historical events are no
more than ephemeral ripples on the great
river of history
its course is set by factors independent
of human ideas and decisions
specifically he says the continents on
our planet had different natural
resources
different geographies plants animals and
microorganisms and details aside
that is what explains the broad sweep of
history including which human ideas were
created
and what decisions were made politics
philosophy
cutlery and all pause there just my
reflection
i think in the future there can be
no greater compliment for an author than
to have been
criticized by david deutsch especially
in the beginning of infinity and so
david is about to do
a withering critique of
jared diamond's not only his book but
his entire worldview
comparing him to angles and marks being
on that
continuum and quite rightly too now you
can look up jared diamond he's
been interviewed by many people um
including sam harris on the making sense
podcast
and indeed he is a great pessimist and
ignores or perhaps just uh well
doesn't have the thought that there is a
reality to abstractions
uh i guess this is one of the more
fundamental
differences between a thinker like david
deutsch and the david deutch worldview
and the typical academic intellectual
and scientist who thinks that all
call all events have to be explained
in terms of physical causes that the
only way in which we can try and
understand
physical reality is by recourse to
events in physical reality and that
seems to make perfectly logical sense
after all what else could it be
supernatural no no there
can be causal things
that go on events that go on in abstract
reality
that cause changes in physical reality
this is not supernatural this is not
magic
this is mundane this now the reality of
abstractions is all the way back there
in
chapter five and you can read about it
there but suffice it to say for now
as we've come to learn what people
what knowledge people creates has a real
impact
on what happens day to day what happens
to a civilization what happens to a
person david deutsch
could have chosen to study physics or
not having chosen to study physics he
could have chosen
various different avenues within the
entire discipline of physics he chose
the deepest and most fundamental areas
of physics
and then chose to explore
quantum computation or the the interface
between computation
and the quantum theory inventing the
field of quantum computation
and it's that that abstract thought that
he had whenever he wrote it wherever he
wrote it so he he
he had the thought what is the thought
he had the idea what's an idea
an idea and a thought they're abstract
things but they're really real
i mean they exist inside your mind but
they're instantiated there
as as in david's terminology
crackles of electricity between neurons
a certain
pattern of electrical firing but it's
not identical to that pattern of
electrical firing
after all we can take that thought or
that idea
in the case of quantum computation and
write it down on a piece of paper
or on a chalkboard or he could explain
it in a lecture as he's done in various
places
these different forms explaining it at
sound waves
writing it down that's ink on paper
having the thought that is of course
electrical crackles
all these different instantiations as we
call them
are ways of representing the idea but
the idea itself
the idea itself is an abstraction
and that abstract idea actually has
physical effects in the real in the real
world the physical world
the real world consists of these
abstract things
as well as these physical things and the
abstract things have real effects
on the physical things there are now
institutes and research bodies around
the world racing
to produce quantum computers and so
that's the effect of david deutscher's
ideas
of of generating this industry this
multi-billion dollar industry now
he's one of the most key people
uh in this entire race towards quantum
computation without david dodge who
knows when
quantum computers would have been
thought of or really refined to the
point where they are now
we might be waiting another 50 years
for a david deutsch to come along if
david deutsch had never existed
for us to be at the point where we are
now with quantum computers and
eventually there will be an industry of
quantum computers where we have desktop
quantum computers
and that will all be due to ideas
that had their genesis at some point in
david deutsch's mind and before that to
the pioneers of quantum theory
and so on and so forth so these abstract
ideas have
real world consequences that's common
sense isn't it
well it seems common sense only in light
of hearing that
idea so now that i've explained it
david's explained it
now it seems you know how could it have
been otherwise but
if you've never heard that before then
you're liable to think that the only way
in which you can explain
events that have happened in physical
reality
including throughout human history is by
recourse to physical stuff
is by looking at the resources for
example and that's what
jared diamond has done and again
jared diamond and and other authors that
i mentioned and critiqued throughout
this book
should take it as a great complement
because there are many people who have
these sort of pessimistic
ideas but jared diamond no doubt has
expressed these pessimistic ideas in a
very
clear and forceful way and so david
could have picked any number
of people who have similar ideas to this
but he's picked jared diamond
and so let's go back to the critique and
david writes
for example part of his explanation
jared diamond's explanation
of why the americas never developed a
technological civilization before the
advent of europeans
is that there were no animals there
suitable for domestication as beasts of
burden
llamas are native to south america and
have been used as beasts of burden since
prehistoric times
so diamond points out that they are not
native to the continent as a whole but
only to the andes mountains
why did no technological civilization
arise in the andes mountains
why did the incan empire not have an
enlightenment diamond's position
is that other biogeographical factors
were unfavorable
the communist thinker friedrich engels
proposed the same ultimate explanation
of history and made the same proviso
about llamas in 1884
and engels wrote the eastern hemisphere
possessed nearly all the animals
adaptable to domestication
the western hemisphere america had no
mammals that could be domesticated
except a llama
which moreover was only found in one
part of south america
owing to these differences and natural
conditions the population of each
hemisphere
now goes on its own way and that's from
the origin of the family private
property in the state
friedrich engels based on notes by karl
marx i'll just pause there
i've spent some time in south america i
love it there it's a wonderful
place so picturesque i particularly like
bolivia and the place is full of llamas
and alpacas and varunkas i think is the
other one anyway there's three
creatures that all look similar
look a little bit ridiculous to be
honest they can all be domesticated in
fact they're domesticated here in
australia
which is completely unlike for the most
part um
in south america and yet people love
their wool uh you know
you get very high quality fleece of
these creatures
so it's simply false it's simply false
to say they couldn't be domesticated
i mean this is a strange ad hoc attempt
to shoehorn in
an explanation that really doesn't fit
anyway let's keep going
and david writes but why did llamas
continue
to be only found in one part of south
america if they could have been useful
elsewhere
engels did not address that issue but
diamond realized that it cries out for
explanation
because unless the reason that llamas
were not exported was itself
biogeographical diamond's ultimate
explanation
is false so he proposed a
biogeographical reason
he pointed out that a hot lowland region
unsuitable for llamas separates the
andes from the highlands of central
america
where llamas would have been useful in
agriculture pause down my reflection
again again i i defy
any other continent to put up their hand
to say they are
hotter consistently than australia okay
sometimes there are
some places and in fact certain places
in in central america might
fit that bill but barely barely
i mean it is very hot and dry here in
australia and yet
we farm llamas i'll put some photos up
uh they are they're they're a common
site in some places here in new south
wales in my own state where i am so
this is simply again false it's a shoe
horning in it's it's it's
a it's an attempt without uh
it's it's a pure guess it's a pure guess
there is absolutely no reason why
human beings cannot take something like
the llama from one place another even an
ancient culture they can carry the water
with them they can carry the food with
them
animals are very robust kangaroos will
survive in hot and cold climates
llamas will survive in hot and cold
climates i mean the
the horse uh famously you know sort of
began in arabia somewhere other and now
it exists everywhere around the world
cows are a similar sort of a thing
animals uh
you know they can tolerate quite a wide
range of temperatures so this is simply
you know to a person who i guess is
interested in agriculture
would seem ridiculous i think anyway
no let's persevere david writes
but again why must such a region have
been a barrier to the spread of
domesticated llamas
traders traveled between south and
central america for centuries
perhaps over land and certainly by sea
where there are long-range traders it is
not necessary for an idea to be useful
in an unbroken line of places for it to
be able to be spread
as i remarked in chapter 11 knowledge
has the unique ability to take
aim at a distant target and utterly
transform it while having scarcely any
effect on the space between
just pausing there it is my reflection
apologies if this becomes irritating
that's just one of those
sentences that if you're dipping into
this podcast now and you haven't
listened to all
50 something episodes as of today
could easily blow by you that's such an
important point about
david's conception of knowledge that is
unique to david deutsch
is very much a quotable piece of david
deutch
again let me just repeat he writes there
knowledge has the unique ability to take
aim at a distant target and utterly
transform it
without having any effect on things in
between so we are beginning
the process of transforming
mars it is very very early on but the
number of probes up there now
studying that particular place that the
distant far-off uh
inert rock uh one day in the distant
future
we will have something approaching a
civilization there we will have
buildings there
and that is not because a force of
nature
like gravity or the electromagnetic
force or some nuclear force whatever
uh has aimed itself there it's because
we people
our knowledge has been aimed to that
place and then transformed it
much like the way in which europeans
aimed their knowledge in the form of
people
and boats traveling to the americas and
to australasia
and various other places and then
transformed those places sydney only
exists
because knowledge from
england was aimed from england
via boats centuries old boats now
coming to australia and then radically
transforming the civilizations that were
here
the continent that was here into a
beautiful
thriving metropolis and civilization
where people are now creating an
open-ended stream of knowledge creation
okay so let me just read a little bit
more and we'll
end it here for today and david writes
after talking about how knowledge can
transform a place
once it's been aimed there he writes so
what would it have taken
for some of those traders to take some
llamas north for sale
only the idea the leap of imagination to
guess that if something is useful here
it might be useful there too
and the boldness to take the speculative
and physical risk
polynesian traders did exactly that they
ranged further
across a more formidable natural barrier
carrying goods including livestock
why did none other south american
traders ever think of selling llamas to
the central americans
we may never know but why should it have
had anything to do with geography
they may simply have been too set in
their ways perhaps innovative uses for
animals were taboo
perhaps such a trade was attempted but
failed every time because of sheer bad
luck
but whatever the reason was it could not
have been that the hot region
constituted a physical barrier
because it did not okay
ending the reading there for today and
yes i
went to machu picchu in um peru
where the so-called lost city of the
incas still stands
and much is made about uh what happened
to the incas oh i think the incas are
still there
i don't think the incas were wiped out
the incas are the
quechuan people that still exist still
live
and still now thrive throughout bolivia
and peru and parts of argentina as well
wonderful communities of of people there
people that met the spanish
conquistadors and yes it was a violent
meeting and yes
uh terrible atrocities were committed on
all sides
the incans themselves were terribly
violent people
you know having the belief that you
needed to
sacrifice young children regularly and
in fact put
young children at the base of the
buildings i think in centuries gone by
and that has gradually morphed into
llama fetuses
now being put in the base of newly built
buildings
these ancient incans were clearly part
of a static society
they had built great buildings and
monuments in
rather inaccessible places and so
certainly the engineering feats there
were quite impressive for the time
but not as impressive as for example the
spanish
who conquered them and had not merely
conquered them but really
i think taught them
how to succeed and thrive and survive
and probably rather than wiping them out
through disease which is often the way
in which it's
it's suggested that that encounter
went that the spanish merely massacred
or
caused the death by disease of so many
incans that may have happened as well
but largely the incan survived the
native people there survived
and now thrive and certainly in a place
like bolivia bolivia is very much
a native american nation
uh and the the the
spaniards a former minority unlike in
let's say
for the south in argentina where they
form a majority
and so south america is just an
absolutely fascinating place a beautiful
place
to visit and and an interesting
study in how static societies can become
dynamic societies
the static society left behind but
clearly
that ethnic group of people continue
through to today but they're no longer a
static society
nothing like what they used to be so
sure there are aspects of the culture
that have been preserved over time but
the important
aspects of the culture that was the inca
the ancient incan culture that kept them
from making rapid progress
has largely been destroyed and isn't
that good
the people themselves have survived
but the culture large parts of the
culture have been done away with
replaced by better enlightenment values
and so
although bolivia is one of these places
where i've talked before on the podcast
about how if only they had better
governments they'd be far more wealthy
nevertheless they are still a more or
less modern society certainly
in comparison to the static society of
the incans
okay so that's it for today we're going
to have a part three maybe there'll be a
part four i'm not sure
because this is such such an important
chapter that really as i
said in the previous episode i think
brings together
so much of earlier chapters in the
beginning of infinity
that we really need to spend time
unpacking what is said here
until next time bye
[Music]
[Applause]
um
[Music]
up
so for those who've uh stuck around this
is uh
an epilogue or what we might call an
easter egg for
the true die hard fans 2020 was
a difficult time for many people and
like many people
i wasn't working in the same way that i
was working previously
many people were furloughed i wasn't
exactly furloughed but i wasn't doing
the same job that i'd been doing for the
last sort of
20 years and so i had 2020 large
part of 2020 devoted to spending time on
a close and focused study of the
beginning of infinity
and associated material and making more
of these
these podcasts and so the rate of
podcast making
uh increased but as many may have
noticed this year in 2021
the rate of podcast making has somewhat
declined and that's because i've taken
on a new job
and that's been unfortunate but happily
i won't be doing that job for much
longer
i'll be able to devote far more time to
the beginning of infinity
and to associated work and to promoting
these ideas
and in fact it looks like that this will
become
my real focus because
naval ravikant who has been a great
supporter
of topcast over the last few months
and i've been really buoyed by the fact
that he has sent me some nice comments
about the podcast that i've been doing
and i won't be saying much right now
but suffice it to say for the moment
that we're going to work on some common
projects together we've already
done some and anyone who's following top
cast may be aware that i've had some
conversations with naval
over there on clubhouse and the very
first of the podcasts that i've been
doing with naval
will be coming out soon and this episode
is the first
one where really it is a joint venture
between the vile and eye naval is not
here physically
but he's certainly here in spirit he's
such a great supporter of the podcast
that the podcast will be
levelling up i hope to some extent over
the coming
months so as we're coming to the end
of the top cast beginning of infinity
series
i regard this as really just the
beginning of the beginning of infinity
that we will be able to promote these
ideas in concert with naval
and be able to really begin spreading
the message well
of course the message has already begun
to be spread
by david deutch himself but we're always
at the beginning
of the beginning of infinity and so it's
a wonderful
time for the community of people who are
supporters of the books and supporters
of david's ideas
and trying to cure the world of what has
become a pessimistic
culture in the intellectual community
certainly and so over the coming months
i hope that you see some differences i
hope that you see some
more content about the work of david
deutsch
promoting these ideas clarifying some
scientific
and philosophical understandings that
can help us
all perhaps benefit and when i say all i
really do mean all as the subtitle of
the beginning of infinity says
these are explanations that transform
the world
and so we hope we can restart
reinvigorate
that transforming of the world through
this book through this brilliant book
and these brilliant ideas
by this brilliant philosopher and
physicist david deutsch and
now we have some other people on board
uh people who are extremely successful
in
promoting things in entrepreneurship and
in being able to get a message out there
so look forward to some
additional content from myself from
naval and from other people associated
with
trying to promote these ideas because we
really do think
it is not just intellectually
stimulating to have these conversations
it really can be world changing and we
do need it and although the world
we should be optimistic about the way in
which the world is not everyone is
and we can have we can never do without
enough optimism
never do without enough optimism in the
deutsche
sense where we can create knowledge ever
faster solve problems ever faster
and have a lot of fun doing so so until
next time
bye
you